I have worked 10 years in academic environments. During this time, I moved across labs located in Italy, France (2 of them) Germany (2 of them) and The Netherlands. I got published quite well, and got a Marie Curie for my PostDoc, quite a prestigious grant that would have facilitated me staying in academia. 

At some point, I grew tired of academic environment. There were many reasons that made me decide to leave, but here's not the place to discuss that. In research, my main focus was neuroscience, but overall, I got my head deep enough into data of all sorts to see the beauty of it. One logical step for me was to move in the field of data science in the private sector. That felt like a big jump in cold water, like the germans say. In retrospect, it was relatively easier than I expected, but I admit that I prepared a lot for that change.

I write this article for other PhDs and PostDocs out there, that might feel like a change. Maybe telling you how I did it (you"ll find many of these stories on the web) could give some tips or inspiration. I anyway feel like writing it down, as long as it"s still fresh.
I will discuss some aspects that I found important when moving from academia to the private sector, and reflect on others that ended up not being so important.

1. Being the data guy.
One thing should be clear: I was not a data guy. Hell, I sometimes doubt I am now! In fact, I started knowing nothing about it. Most thing I knew when I started my master internship was about means and standard deviations, and even this latter concept was not easy for me to grasp. Forget about parametric statistical testing, ANOVA and what not. I was not much better when I started my actual PhD... Point is: if you relate, don't worry. That stuff is complicated. Everyone struggles with it. Learning by doing, that"s how I got some grasp on data concepts. Of course you can read, prepare, do online courses. All of that help. But it"s not because you don"t understand it that you should not try to play with it. At least that"s how I see it :)


Now, if you are reading this, I guess you are an academic. Then you probably learned to collect and extract data, visualize and explore, and do some basic or maybe more complex statistical testing, probably frequentist. That's all good, and it can work beautifully. What I learned when I started working in the private sector though, was that all this fancy preparation of data, doing power analysis to use the right sample, using the right statistical testing to compare your distributions...not so important. Don't get me wrong, you should still do it! But no one will look at whether what you are saying is sound. No peer-review. Even worse if you already have a PhD, then people trust you even more, which they probably shouldn't. 
Very often, in this so-called "real world" situations, you will have to find a balance between rigor in your work, and meeting deadlines and showing your work to others. While in research we are quite perfectionistic, and aim at understanding processes the best we can, I found that in the private sector, a cumulative, incremental process works much better. It's better to start with a low-level product, a primitive form of what you have in mind, but that already can produce some added-value. You can improve it by testing, and by integrating feedback from others. That goes along with an Agile framework, which prones a more flexible work flow done by self managing teams, where expertise is rather distributed than focused on particular individuals. That brings me to mz next point.

2. Project Management.
Now, back when I was a PhD, the term "Project Management" activated a mental representation of a suit guy, probably wearing sunglasses, a carrying a briefcase. I don't know why... There is some interesting pieces suggesting that project management is actually not a job per se, but rather an attitude, a tool, and mindset that one can have in its work. In research...never heard about that! I managed my projects by writing down some ToDo lists on pieces of paper, and documented almost nothing (except for some code, and even then, poorly). 
I believe that project management is key to sucess, and not just outside Academia. In my last year as a neuroscientist, I attended project management courses, to help me structure my work. I did not do this aiming at exiting academia, but rather as a new tool in my skillset. I first attended, and passed an exam for SCRUM master. I won't go into to much details, but that is connected to the Agile framework I mentioned earlier. SCRUM is a standard that allows team to work dynamically and incrementally, that is very well suited for some businesses, in particular IT, but not only. That course was very hard at first... many words were unfamiliar to me, and most attendees were IT people that had no idea what it meant to be a researcher like me. 
During the course, I heard about "waterfall project management", and mostly, heard it was bad. Curious though, I decided to read about that and found out that this method is still the most used, but things are changing fast. Basically, Agile is the new kind on the block and wants to steal some shares from WaterFall. Kind of. Still, I decided to get some teachings. I attended, and ultimately passed the exam for PMP (Project Manager Professional), of the Project Management Institute (PMI). And that was great! I do agree with some critics of this system and of its unflexibility. However, learning about waterfall project management really gets you started on basic concepts of which field you should carefully manage, such as costs, schedule and communication. It will give you tools and ideas on how to do so, and overall, I found it very inspiring. I still work rather Agile, but the way I document and manage the project as a very waterfally smell to it. 
Take home message: learn some project management. You don't need to become a PMP, that takes quite some (boring) studying. But inform yourself, and try to structure and document your project in such a way that a newcomer would only have to go through your notes to understand what has been done.

3. Rythm...
I don't know about you, but back when I was in research, I was pretty much my own boss. I had a few projects, that fell under a grant protocol that was quite flexible. I managed my projects and worked hard to get data, and get things moving forward. I was used to get things done fast, and when problems arose, I would find a relatively quick fix, a week tops, often less.
Well, things are different in the private sector. Now again, I am working in a relatively big company, things might be different in a startup, or smaller company. But larger structures will have higher number of employees, each one that brought some idiosyncracies with them. People have different schedules, constraints, and sometimes agenda. You might find yourself in need of some data, quite easy to get, but waiting some weeks for the people responsible for it to find the time to help you with that. Things go slower than in academia. 
By the same token, you might be involved in many more projects than in academic environments, so all in all, you will still be quite busy, if not more ;) 
First of all, accept that rythm, and adapt to it. Second, relations with others are key to unblock situations and help your projects more forward, so you might want to take that into account. Third, ,understand the company's culture. That one is very important, since each structure will have particular characteristics that makes it unique. By the same occasion, learn about the Opeartional Process Assest (PMI terms), in other words, what knowledge, expertise, data, is already present that can help you and your projects. Last, things get better once you are not the new one, who is learning the ropes of the company ;) 

4. Don't be scared to introduce new tools
My first position outside academia was in a company transitioning into the digital system, and where data-driven decision were mostly made from simple excel graphs. Nothing wrong about that, it can do wonderful things in the right hands. However, modern data-related work follows some standards, documentation, version control, etc...all these things can be quite new for colleagues less versed into data than you are. Don't be scared in showing what you can, the advantages of new systems and softwares. And that brings me to my last point.

5. Resistance
While in the last point I told you to bring all your toolkit with you, and unpacking it, some people will be resistant to change. That's human I guess. But it also makes sense: a company has been using a system for a decade now. The system is relatively obsolete, but hey, it does the job. Why should be now invest in teachings, and time (thus not invested in producing new assets) in learning a new tool that would improve, but not by much, the current system. I guess the sweet spot is to work on the "not by much" part, by convinding, quietly and patiently, that a new tool would make sense. You will fail, thus you will learn. But be prepared for resistance, much more than in academic environments where innovation and exploration is the base of most work done. 



